Giant waves damage S Asia economy

Governments, aid agencies, insurers and travel firms are among those counting the cost of the massive earthquake and waves that hammered southern Asia.

The worst-hit areas are Sri Lanka, India, Indonesia and Thailand, with at least 23,000 people killed. Early estimates from the World Bank put the amount of aid needed at about $5bn (£2.6bn), similar to the cash offered Central America after Hurricane Mitch. Mitch killed about 10,000 people and caused damage of about $10bn in 1998. World Bank spokesman Damien Milverton told the Wall Street Journal that he expected an aid package of financing and debt relief.

Tourism is a vital part of the economies of the stricken countries, providing jobs for 19 million people in the south east Asian region, according to the World Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC). In the Maldives islands, in the Indian ocean, two-thirds of all jobs depend on tourism.

But the damage covers fishing, farming and businesses too, with hundreds of thousands of buildings and small boats destroyed by the waves. International agencies have pledged their support; most say it is impossible to gauge the extent of the damage yet. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has promised rapid action to help the governments of the stricken countries cope.

"The IMF stands ready to do its part to assist these nations with appropriate support in their time of need," said managing director Rodrigo Rato. Only Sri Lanka and Bangladesh currently receive IMF support, while Indonesia, the quake's epicentre, has recently graduated from IMF assistance. It is up to governments to decide if they want IMF help. Other agencies, such as the Asian Development Bank, have said that it is too early to comment on the amount of aid needed. There is no underestimating the size of the problem, however. The United Nations' emergency relief coordinator, Jan Egeland, said that "this may be the worst national disaster in recent history because it is affecting so many heavily populated coastal areas... so many vulnerable communities. "Many people will have [had] their livelihoods, their whole future destroyed in a few seconds." He warned that "the longer term effects many be as devastating as the tidal wave or the tsunami itself" because of the risks of epidemics from polluted drinking water.
